Title: What Is Retirement Planning? Steps, Stages, and What to Consider
URL: https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/retirement-planning.asp
Scraped: 2025-07-31 21:45:14
==================================================

What Is Retirement Planning?
Creating a retirement plan begins with determining your long-term financial goals and tolerance for risk, and then starting to take action to reach those goals. The process can begin anytime during your working years, but the earlier, the better.
The process of creating a retirement plan includes identifying your income sources, adding up your expenses, putting a savings plan into effect, and managing your assets. By estimating your future cash flows, you can judge whether
your retirement income goal
is realistic.
Needless to say, a retirement plan is not a static document. You’ll need to update it from time to time as well as review it to monitor your progress.
Key Takeaways
It is never too early or too late to start a retirement plan.
A retirement plan is a strategy for long-term saving, investing, and finally withdrawing money you accumulate to achieve a financially comfortable retirement.
A key part of a retirement plan is taking advantage of one of the government-approved investment vehicles, such as an individual retirement account (IRA) or a 401(k) account, which offers tax advantages to retirement savers.
Your retirement plan needs to take into account your estimated future expenses, liabilities, and life expectancy.
How Retirement Planning Works
A retirement plan is your preparation for a good life after you’re done working to pay the bills or at least done working a full-time job. But it’s not all about money.
The non-financial aspects include lifestyle choices such as how you want to spend your time in retirement and where you’ll live. A holistic approach to retirement planning considers all these areas.
The goals for your retirement plan will change in focus over time:
Early in a person’s working life, your contribution to retirement savings may be modest. The reward is 40-plus years of investment growth.
During the middle of your career, when your income may be at its peak, you might set specific income or asset targets and take steps toward achieving them.
Once you reach retirement age, you go from accumulating assets to what planners call the distribution phase. You’re no longer paying into your retirement account(s). Instead, you start collecting the rewards of decades of savings.
Note
Some retirement plans change depending on where you are
. The United States and
Canada
each have unique systems of workplace-sponsored plans.
How Much Do You Need to Retire?
Your magic number, which is the
amount you need to retire comfortably
, is highly personalized. But there are rules of thumb that can give you an idea of how much to save.
People used to say that you need around $1 million to retire comfortably.
Other professionals use the 80% rule, which states that you need 80% of your current income to live comfortably after retiring. So if you made $100,000 per year, you would need savings that produce $80,000 per year for roughly 20 years, or a total of $1.6 million.
Others say most of us aren’t saving anywhere near enough to meet those benchmarks and should adjust our lifestyles accordingly.
Estimating Expenses
Your post-retirement expenses largely determine that “magic number.”
It’s a good idea to
create a retirement budget
, calculating estimated costs for housing, health insurance, food, clothing, and transportation.
And since you’ll have more free time on your hands, you may also want to factor in the cost of entertainment, hobbies, and travel.
It may be hard to come up with concrete figures, but a reasonable estimate will be helpful.
Steps to Retirement Planning
Regardless of where you are in life, several key
steps apply to almost everyone
during their retirement planning. The following are some of the most common:
Come up with a plan. This includes deciding when you want to start saving when you want to retire, and how much you’d like to save for your ultimate goal.
Decide how much you’ll set aside each month. Using automatic deductions takes away the guesswork, keeps you on track, and takes away
the temptation to stop or forget
depositing money on your own.
Choose the right accounts for you
. Invest in a 401(k) or similar account if your employer offers that option. If the company offers an employer match and you don’t sign up, you’re giving away free money. Whether or not there’s an employer match, you’re getting a good deal tax-wise.
Check on your investments from time to time and make adjustments. This is especially important after a big event, like marriage or a baby.
What Is a Retirement Plan?
A retirement plan may be seen as a road map to a comfortable life after work. It entails accumulating enough money to pay for the lifestyle you want to enjoy in the future. Your retirement plan may well change over time, but the earlier you get started, the better.
Retirement Plans
Tax-advantaged retirement savings plans have become the keystone of long-term savings for Americans. You should have access to one or more of these plans depending on how you earn a living. Each has its own rules and regulations.
Employer-Sponsored Plans
Most large companies offer their employees
401(k)
plans. Nonprofit employers have similar
403(b)
plans.
An upfront benefit of these
qualified retirement plans
is that your employer has the option to match what you invest up to a certain amount. For example, if you contribute 3% of your annual income to your plan account, your employer may match that amount, depositing the sum into your retirement account along with your contribution.
You can contribute more than the amount that will earn the employer match. Some experts recommend contributing upward of 10%.
401(k) Limits
The maximum is revised yearly by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Participants can contribute up to $23,000 in 2024 ($23,500 in 2025) to a 401(k) or 403(b), some of which may be added to with an
employer match.
People age 50 and older can contribute an extra $7,500 per year as a
catch-up contribution
in 2024 and 2025. Those aged 60 to 63 can now make a catch-up contribution of $11,250 in 2025.
These accounts can earn a much higher rate of return than a savings account (although the investments are not risk-free). The funds in the account, if it is a traditional account rather than a Roth account, are not taxed until you withdraw them. Since your contributions are taken off your gross income, you will get an immediate income tax break.
Those who are on the cusp of a higher tax bracket might consider contributing enough to lower their
tax liability
.
Traditional Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs)
The traditional
individual retirement account (IRA)
is similar to a 401(k) plan, but it can be obtained at virtually any bank or brokerage. It is primarily for self-employed people and others who have no access to a 401(k), but anyone with earned income can invest in an IRA.
The money you save in an IRA is deducted from your income for the year, lowering your taxable income and, therefore, your tax liability.
The tax benefit to this kind of account is upfront. So when it comes time to take distributions from the account, you are subject to your standard tax rate at that time. Keep in mind, though, that the money grows on a tax-deferred basis. There are no
capital gains
or dividend taxes that are assessed on the balance of your account until you begin making withdrawals.
IRA Limits
The IRS sets limits on how much you can contribute to a traditional IRA each year. The limit for 2024 and 2025 is $7,000. People who are 50 and older can invest an additional $1,000 for a total of $8,000 in 2024 and 2025.
Distributions
must be taken at age 73 and can be taken as early as 59½. You will owe taxes on the withdrawal at your regular income tax rate for that year.
Roth Individual Retirement Account (Roth IRA)
A
Roth IRA
is funded with post-tax dollars. This is a great variation on the IRA, with a little more pain upfront for a lot of gain down the road.
The Roth IRA eliminates the immediate tax deduction of the traditional IRA. The money you pay into it is taxed in that year.
However, you should owe no taxes when you start withdrawing money, either on the amount you put in or the investment gains it accrued.
Starting a Roth IRA early can pay off big time in the long run, even if you don’t have a lot of money to invest at first. Remember, the longer the money sits in a retirement account, the more tax-free interest is earned.
Roth Limits
The 2024 and 2025 contribution limit for either IRA (Roth or traditional) is $7,000 a year, or $8,000 if you are age 50 or older. A Roth has other restrictions, related to income. For instance:
A single filer can contribute the full amount only if they make $146,000 or less annually, as of the 2024 tax year. For 2025, they must make $150,000 or less.
After that, you can invest to a lesser degree, up to an annual income of $161,000 in 2024 and $165,000 in 2025.
Note that the income limits are higher for married couples filing jointly.
As with a 401(k), a Roth IRA has some penalties associated with taking money out
before you hit retirement age
. But there are a few notable exceptions that may be useful in an emergency. First, you can always withdraw the money you invested (but not the gains it earned) without paying a penalty.
SIMPLE Individual Retirement Account (IRA)
The
Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees (SIMPLE) IRA
is a retirement account available to
employees of small businesses
. It’s an alternative to the 401(k), which is expensive for an employer to manage. It works the same way a 401(k) does, allowing employees to save money automatically through payroll deductions with the option of an employer match.
This amount is capped at 3% of an employee’s annual salary. The annual contribution limit for a SIMPLE IRA is $16,000 in 2024 and $16,500 in 2025. Catch-up contributions of $3,500 allow employees 50 or older to bump that limit up to $19,500 in 2024 and $20,000 in 2025.
Note
Once you set up a retirement account, the question becomes where to invest the money. You will be offered a choice, usually among mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs). Many also offer target-date funds, which automatically alter your selections over time, allocating more money toward conservative choices as you approach retirement age.
Stages of Retirement Planning
Below are some guidelines for successful retirement
planning at different stages
of your life.
Young Adulthood (Ages 21 to 35)
Those embarking on adult life may not have a lot of money free to invest, but they do have time to let
investments mature
, which is a critical piece of retirement savings. This is the principle of compounding.
Compound interest allows interest to earn interest, and the more time you have, the more interest you will earn. If you can only put aside $50 a month, it will be worth three times more if you invest it at age 25 than if you wait to start investing until age 45,
thanks to the joys of compounding
.
You might be able to invest more money in the future, but you’ll never be able to make up for that lost time.
Note
Some federal agencies and uniformed services offer
thrift savings plans
.
Early Midlife (Ages 36 to 50)
Early midlife tends to bring financial strains, including mortgages, student loans, insurance premiums, and credit card debt.
Still, it’s critical to continue saving at this stage of retirement planning. The combination of earning more money and the time you still have to invest and earn interest makes these years some of the best for aggressive savings.
People at this stage of retirement planning should continue to take advantage of any 401(k) matching programs that their employers offer. They should also try to max out contributions to a 401(k) or Roth IRA (you can have both at the same time). For those ineligible for a Roth IRA, consider a
traditional IRA
. As with your 401(k), this is funded with pretax dollars, and the assets within it grow tax-deferred.
Some employer-sponsored plans offer a Roth option to set aside after-tax retirement contributions. You are limited to the same annual limit, but there are
no income limitations
as with a Roth IRA.
Finally, don’t neglect life insurance and disability insurance. You want to ensure that your family can survive financially without pulling from retirement savings should something happen to you.
Later Midlife (Ages 50 to 65)
As you approach retirement, your investment accounts should become more conservative. Treasury bills (T-bills) are one of the most conservative investments, although their returns are also low compared to other investments.
People in this age group have a few advantages. These often include higher wages as well as more disposable income than younger savers.
It’s never too late
to set up and contribute to a 401(k) or an IRA. One benefit of this retirement planning stage is catch-up contributions. From age 50 on, you can contribute an additional $1,000 in 2024 and 2025 to your traditional or Roth IRA and an additional $7,500 a year to your 401(k) in 2024 and 2025.
Other Investments
Those who have maxed out their tax-incentivized retirement savings options can consider other forms of investment to supplement their retirement savings. Certificates of deposit (CDs), blue-chip stocks, or real estate investments (like a vacation home that you rent out) can be reasonably safe ways to add to your nest egg.
You can also begin to get a sense of what your
Social Security benefits
will be and at what age it makes sense to start taking them. Eligibility for early benefits starts at age 62, but the retirement age for full benefits is 66.
This is the time to look into long-term care insurance, which will help cover the costs of a nursing home or home care should you need it in your advanced years. If you don’t properly plan for health-related expenses, especially unexpected ones, they can decimate your savings.
Note
The Social Security Administration (SSA) offers an
online calculator
to estimate your eventual monthly payment.
Other Aspects of Retirement Planning
Retirement planning includes a lot more than simply how much you will save and how much you need. It takes into account your complete financial picture.
Your Home
For most Americans, the single biggest asset they own is their home. How does that fit into your retirement plan?
A home was considered an asset in the past, but since the housing market crash, planners see it as less of an asset than they once did. With the popularity of home equity loans and home equity lines of credit (HELOCs), many homeowners are
entering retirement in mortgage debt
instead of well above water.
Once you retire, there’s also the question of whether you should sell your home and downsize. If you still live in the home where you raised a family, it might be bigger and costlier than you need or want.
Your retirement plan should include an unbiased look at your home and what to do with it.
Estate Planning
Your
estate plan
addresses what happens to your assets after you die. It should include a
will
that lays out your plans.
But even before that, you should set up a trust or use some other strategy to keep as much of it as possible shielded from estate taxes.
As of 2024, the first $13.61 million of an estate is exempt from
estate taxes
($13.99 million in 2025), but many people are finding ways to leave their money to their children in a way that doesn’t pay them in a lump sum.
Tax Efficiency
Once you reach retirement age and begin taking distributions, taxes become a bigger problem. Most of your retirement accounts are taxed as ordinary income tax.
That’s one good argument for considering a Roth IRA or a Roth 401(k), as both allow you to pay taxes upfront rather than upon withdrawal.
If you believe you will have a higher taxable income later in life, it may make sense to do a Roth conversion. An accountant or financial planner can help you work through such tax considerations.
Medical Insurance
Medical expenses tend to increase with age. You will have government-sponsored
Medicare
coverage at a modest cost to you, but many supplement its coverage with a Medicare Advantage or
Medigap
policy.
Your choices are many and complex. It’s a good idea to start checking out your options well in advance of retiring.
How Do I Start a Retirement Plan?
Retirement planning isn’t difficult. It’s as easy as setting aside some money every month—and every little bit counts.
You can start with a tax-advantaged savings plan, either a 401(k) through an employer or an IRA through a bank or brokerage firm.
You may also want to consider talking to a professional, such as a financial planner or investment broker who can steer you in the right direction.
The earlier you start, the better. That’s because your investments grow over time by earning interest. And you’ll earn interest on that interest.
Why Is a Retirement Plan So Important?
A retirement plan helps you
sock away enough money to maintain the same lifestyle
you currently have after you retire. While you may work part-time or pick up the odd gig here or there, it probably won’t be enough to sustain your current lifestyle. Social Security benefits will only take you so far. That’s why it’s important to have a viable long-term plan for a financially comfortable retirement.
What Are the Main Pieces of a Retirement Plan?
A retirement plan is about accumulating enough money to enable you to enjoy a comfortable life after work. There are a couple of key issues to keep in mind:
Consider how to minimize the taxes you owe on your retirement income. One way to do this is to sock away money in a Roth account or convert your traditional account to a Roth before you retire.
Don’t overlook estate planning
. You’re taking care of your loved ones as you take care of yourself.
What Are the Options Beyond a 401(k)?
If you don’t have access to a 401(k), you have a few options. You could open an individual retirement account (IRA); however, the contribution limit for IRAs is much lower than for 401(k)s: $7,000 versus $23,000 in 2024 ($7,000 versus $23,500 in 2025), respectively. There’s also the
solo 401(k)
for self-employed workers. You might consider an annuity, but be careful: They’re typically illiquid and come with high fees. You can also put money in a brokerage account, though this won’t benefit from the tax advantages of the accounts listed above.
The Bottom Line
Everyone dreams of the day they can finally say goodbye to the workforce. But doing so costs money. That’s where retirement planning comes into play. It doesn’t matter at what point you are in your life. Setting aside money now means you’ll have less to worry about later.